Token22 batch 2 (#344)
Unboxed-Software/solana-course: content/transfer-fee.md

Before we go into the extension, here's a quick intro to "fee basis points".

A basis point is a unit of measurement used in finance to describe the percentage change in the value or rate of a financial instrument. One basis point is equivalent to 0.01% or 0.0001 in decimal form.

To get the fee we must calculate it as follows:

$$ Fee = {token_amount * fee_basis_points \over 10000} $$

The constant 10,000 is used to convert the fee basis point percentage to the equivalent amount.

## Configuring a mint with a transfer fee

Initializing a mint with the `transfer fee` extension involves three instructions:
- `SystemProgram.createAccount`
- `createInitializeTransferFeeConfigInstruction`
- `createInitializeMintInstruction`

The first instruction `SystemProgram.createAccount` allocates space on the blockchain for the mint account. This instruction accomplishes three things:
 - Allocates `space`
 - Transfers `lamports` for rent
 - Assigns to it's owning program

As with all Token Extension Program's mints, we need to calculate the space and lamports needed for the mint. We can get these by calling `getMintLen` and `getMinimumBalanceForRentExemption`

```ts

> const extensions = [ExtensionType.TransferFeeConfig]

Reviewer: Remember to format these too per CONTRiBUTING.md (just paste them into a file and save it, let prettier do it's work, then paste back).

- `transferFeeBasisPoints`: Amount of transfer collected as fees, expressed as basis points of the transfer amount
- `maximumFee`: Maximum fee assessed on transfers
- `programId`: SPL Token program account

```ts
const initializeTransferFeeConfigInstruction = createInitializeTransferFeeConfigInstruction(
	mintKeypair.publicKey,
	payer.publicKey,
	payer.publicKey,
	feeBasisPoints,
	maxFee,
	TOKEN_2022_PROGRAM_ID
)
```

The third instruction `createInitializeMintInstruction` initializes the mint.

```ts
const initializeMintInstruction = createInitializeMintInstruction(
	mintKeypair.publicKey,
	decimals,
	payer.publicKey,
	null,
	TOKEN_2022_PROGRAM_ID
)
```

Lastly, you need to add all of these instructions to a transaction and send it off the the blockchain.

```ts
const mintTransaction = new Transaction().add(
	createAccountInstruction,
	initializeTransferFeeConfigInstruction,
	initializeMintInstruction
);

const signature = await sendAndConfirmTransaction(
	connection,
	mintTransaction,
	[payer, mintKeypair],
	{commitment: 'finalized'}
)
```

## Transferring mint with transfer fees

There are a couple of notes when transferring tokens with the `transfer fee` extension.

> First, the recipient is the one who "pays" for the fee. If I send 100 tokens with basis points of 50 (5%), the recipient will receive 95 tokens (five withheld)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, the recipient is the one who "pays" for the fee. If I send 100 tokens with basis points of 50 (5%), the recipient will receive 95 tokens (five being withheld).
```

> Second, the fee is calculated not by the tokens sent, but the smallest unit of said token. In Solana programming, we always specify amounts to be transferred, minted or burned in their smallest unit. To send one SOL to someone, we actually send `1 * 10 ^ 9` lamports. Another way to look at it is if you wanted to send one US dollar, you're actually sending 100 pennies. Let's make this dollar a token with a 50 basis points (5%) transfer fee. Sending one dollar, would result in a five cent fee. Now let's say we have a max fee of 10 cents, this will always be the highest fee, even if we send $10,000.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Second, the fee is calculated not by the tokens sent, but the smallest unit of said token. In Solana programming, we always specify amounts to be transferred, minted or burned in their minor unit. To send one SOL to someone, we actually send `1 * 10 ^ 9` lamports. Another way to look at it is if you wanted to send one US dollar, you're actually sending 100 pennies. Let's make this dollar a token with a 50 basis points (5%) transfer fee. Sending one dollar, would result in a five cent fee. Now let's say we have a max fee of 10 cents, this will always be the highest fee, even if we send $10,000.
```

  TOKEN_2022_PROGRAM_ID
)
```

# Lab

In this lab, we are going to create a transfer fee configured mint. We'll use a fee vault to hold the transfer fees, and we'll collect the fees using both the direct and the harvesting methods.

### 1. Getting started
To get started, clone [this repository's](https://github.com/Unboxed-Software/solana-lab-transfer-fee.git) `starter` branch.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Unboxed-Software/solana-lab-transfer-fee.git
cd solana-lab-transfer-fee
git checkout starter
npm install
```

The starter code comes with following file:
 - `index.ts`

`index.ts` has a main function that creates a connection to the specified cluster and calls `initializeKeypair`. This `main` function is where we'll be writing our script.

### 2. Run validator node

For the sake of this guide, we'll be running our own validator node.

In a separate terminal, run the following command: `solana-test-validator`. This will run the node and also log out some keys and values. The value we need to retrieve and use in our connection is the JSON RPC URL, which in this case is `http://127.0.0.1:8899`. We then use that in the connection to specify to use the local RPC URL.

> ```tsx

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```typescript
```

const connection = new Connection("http://127.0.0.1:8899", "confirmed");
```

Alternatively, if you’d like to use testnet or devnet, import the `clusterApiUrl` from `@solana/web3.js` and pass it to the connection as such:

> ```tsx

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```typescript
```

const connection = new Connection(clusterApiUrl('devnet'), 'confirmed');
```

> If you decide to use devnet, and have issues with airdropping SOL. Feel free to add the `keypairPath` parameter to `initializeKeypair`. You can get this from running `solana config get` in your terminal. And then go to [faucet.solana.com](https://faucet.solana.com/) and airdrop some sol to your address. You can get your address from running `solana address` in your terminal.

Reviewer: I'd just use:

```
const newBalance = await airdropIfRequired(
  connection,
  keypair.publicKey,
  0.5 * LAMPORTS_PER_SOL,
  1 * LAMPORTS_PER_SOL,
);
```

https://github.com/Unboxed-Software/solana-lab-transfer-fee/blob/main/src/keypair-helpers.ts seems to duplicate what's already in the helpers library, and we want users to be able to create programs from scratch using well known libraries. There's around a thousand downloads a week for the helpers library right now.

const sourceAccount = await createAccount(
  connection,
  payer,
  mint,
  sourceKeypair.publicKey,
  undefined,
  {commitment: 'finalized'},
  TOKEN_2022_PROGRAM_ID
)

console.log('Creating destination account...')

const destinationKeypair = Keypair.generate()
const destinationAccount = await createAccount(
  connection,
  payer,
  mint,
  destinationKeypair.publicKey,
  undefined,
  {commitment: 'finalized'},
  TOKEN_2022_PROGRAM_ID
)

console.log('Minting 10 tokens to source...\n\n')

const amountToMint = 10 * (10 ** decimals)

await mintTo(
  connection,
  payer,
  mint,
  sourceAccount,
  payer,
  amountToMint,
  [payer],
  { commitment: 'finalized' },
  TOKEN_2022_PROGRAM_ID
)
```

If you'd like, run the script to check that everything is working:
```bash
npm run start
```

### 6. Transfer one token

Now, let's transfer 1 token from our `sourceAccount` to our `destinationAccount` and see what happens.

To transfer a token with the `transfer fee` extension enabled, we have to call `transferCheckedWithFee`. This requires us to decide how much we want to send, and to calculate the correct fee associated.

To do this, we can do a little math:

> First, to send one full token is actually sending `1 * (10 ^ decimals)` tokens. In Solana programming, we always specify amounts to be transferred, minted or burned in their smallest unit. To send one SOL to someone, we actually send `1 * 10 ^ 9` lamports. Another way to look at it is if you wanted to send one US dollar, you're actually sending 100 pennies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, to send one full token is actually sending `1 * (10 ^ decimals)` tokens. In Solana programming, we always specify amounts to be transferred, minted or burned in the minor unit. To send one SOL to someone, we actually send `1 * 10 ^ 9` lamports. Another way to look at it is if you wanted to send one US dollar, you're actually sending 100 pennies.
```

```bash
npm run start
```

You should get the following:
```bash
Withheld amount after withdraw: 0
Fee vault balance after withdraw: 5000
```

Note: the `withdrawWithheldTokensFromAccounts` can also be used to collect all fees from all token accounts, if you fetch them all first. Something like the following would work:

```ts
const accounts = await connection.getProgramAccounts(
  TOKEN_2022_PROGRAM_ID,
  {
    commitment: 'finalized',
    filters: [
      {
        memcmp: {
          offset: 0,
          bytes: mint.toString(),
        },
      },
    ],
  }
)

const accountsToWithdrawFrom = []
for (const accountInfo of accounts) {
  const unpackedAccount = unpackAccount(
    accountInfo.pubkey,
    accountInfo.account,
    TOKEN_2022_PROGRAM_ID
  )

  const transferFeeAmount = getTransferFeeAmount(unpackedAccount)
  if (
    transferFeeAmount != null &&
    transferFeeAmount.withheldAmount > BigInt(0)
  ) {
    accountsToWithdrawFrom.push(accountInfo.pubkey)
  }
}

await withdrawWithheldTokensFromAccounts(
	connection,
	payer,
	mint,
	feeVaultAccount,
	payer.publicKey,
	[],
	accountsToWithdrawFrom,
	undefined,
	TOKEN_2022_PROGRAM_ID
);
```

### 7.2 Harvest and then withdraw

> Let's look at the second option to retrieving the withheld fees: "harvesting". The difference here is that instead of withdrawing the fees directly, we "harvest" them back to the mint itself using `harvestWithheldTokensToMint`. This is a permissionless function, meaning anyone can call it. This is useful if you use something like [clockwork](https://www.clockwork.xyz/) to "crank" these harvesting functions. 

Reviewer: Not sure what "crank" means. Added a suggestion.

> Let's look at the second option to retrieving the withheld fees: "harvesting". The difference here is that instead of withdrawing the fees directly, we "harvest" them back to the mint itself using `harvestWithheldTokensToMint`. This is a permissionless function, meaning anyone can call it. This is useful if you use something like [clockwork](https://www.clockwork.xyz/) to "crank" these harvesting functions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's look at the second option to retrieving the withheld fees: "harvesting". The difference here is that instead of withdrawing the fees directly, we "harvest" them back to the mint itself using `harvestWithheldTokensToMint`. This is a permissionless function, meaning anyone can call it. This is useful if you use something like [clockwork](https://www.clockwork.xyz/) to automate these harvesting functions. 
```

- `sources`: Source accounts from which to withdraw withheld fees
- `confirmOptions`: Options for confirming the transaction
- `programId`: SPL Token program account

Then we'll check the resulting balances. However, since the withheld amount will now be stored in the mint, we have to fetch the mint account with `getMint` and then read the `transfer fee` extension data on it by calling `getTransferFeeConfig`:

```ts
// HARVEST WITHHELD TOKENS TO MINT
await harvestWithheldTokensToMint(
	connection,
	payer,
	mint,
	[destinationAccount],
	undefined,
	TOKEN_2022_PROGRAM_ID
)

const withheldAccountAfterHarvest = await getAccount(
	connection,
	destinationAccount,
	undefined,
	TOKEN_2022_PROGRAM_ID
);

const withheldAmountAfterHarvest = getTransferFeeAmount(withheldAccountAfterHarvest);

const mintAccountAfterHarvest = await getMint(
	connection,
	mint,
	undefined,
	TOKEN_2022_PROGRAM_ID
)

const mintTransferFeeConfigAfterHarvest = getTransferFeeConfig(mintAccountAfterHarvest);

console.log(`Withheld amount after harvest: ${withheldAmountAfterHarvest?.withheldAmount}`);
console.log(`Mint withheld amount after harvest: ${mintTransferFeeConfigAfterHarvest?.withheldAmount}\n`)

> ```

Reviewer: Great demo!

- `programId`: SPL Token program account

After that, let's check the balances:

```ts
// WITHDRAW HARVESTED TOKENS
await withdrawWithheldTokensFromMint(
	connection,
	payer,
	mint,
	feeVaultAccount,
	payer,
	[],
	undefined,
	TOKEN_2022_PROGRAM_ID
);

const mintAccountAfterSecondWithdraw = await getMint(
	connection,
	mint,
	undefined,
	TOKEN_2022_PROGRAM_ID
)

const mintTransferFeeConfigAfterSecondWithdraw = getTransferFeeConfig(mintAccountAfterSecondWithdraw);

const feeVaultAfterSecondWithdraw = await getAccount(
	connection,
	feeVaultAccount,
	undefined,
	TOKEN_2022_PROGRAM_ID
);

console.log(`Mint withheld balance after second withdraw: ${mintTransferFeeConfigAfterSecondWithdraw?.withheldAmount}`)
console.log(`Fee Vault balance after second withdraw: ${feeVaultAfterSecondWithdraw.amount}`)
```

Now, let's run it.
```bash
npm run start
```

You should see the balances after every step of the way.

That's it! We have successfully created a mint with a transfer fee. If you get stuck at any point, you can find the working code in the `solution` branch of [this repository](https://github.com/Unboxed-Software/solana-lab-transfer-fee.git).

### Challenge

> NCreate a transfer fee enabled mint and transfer some tokens with different decimals, fee transfer points and max fees.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a transfer fee enabled mint and transfer some tokens with different decimals, fee transfer points and max fees.
```
